Uni: dz2276
Name: Dasheng Zhang

Homework 7

-------------------------------------

Problem 1 (21 pts)

The object of the Kevin Bacon Game is to link a movie actor to Kevin Bacon via shared movie roles. The minimum number
of links is an actor’s Bacon number. For instance, Tom Hanks has a Bacon number of 1; he was in Apollo 13 with Kevin
Bacon. Sally Field has a Bacon number of 2, because she was in Forrest Gump with Tom Hanks, who was in Apollo 13 with
Kevin Bacon. Almost all well-known actors have a Bacon number of 1 or 2. Assume that you have a comprehensive list
of (Actor, Movie) pairs.

(a) Explain how to find an actor’s Bacon number.

A:

First, we need to construct a graph based on the (Actor, Movie) pairs:
    Go through every pair:
        add the Actor to the corresponding Movie set (if the Movie set doesn't exist then make a new set)
            eg. Kevin Bacon will be added to the Apollo 13 set
        add the Actor to an Actor set (no duplicate allowed)
    Go through the Actor set and make each element a vertex in the graph;
    Go through each Movie set:
        for each two actors, add an undirected unweighted edge between the two in the graph;

With the graph, we can do breadth-first search using a queue (eg. a linked list), starting from the vertex "Kevin Bacon",
update visited, back pointer and distance markers of adjacent vertices (like what we did in hw6's doBfs()).

And then after the markers of the vertices (that can be reached from Kevin Bacon) are updated, we can find the target actor's
Bacon number by accessing the actor's distance marker. (According to oracleofbacon.org, about 12% of all actors cannot
be linked to the rest of the movie universe, and their Bacon number would be infinite.)

(b) Explain how to find the actor with the highest Bacon number.

A:

Do the breadth-first search starting from vertex "Kevin Bacon", and after the markers of the vertices are updated:

    There will be actors who have an infinite Bacon number, because they are not reachable from vertex "Kevin Bacon".
    Assuming we are finding the actor with the highest finite Bacon number:

    Vertex max = graph.getVertex("Kevin Bacon");
    max.cost = 0;
    for (Vertex v : graph.vertices.values()) {
        if (v.cost > max.cost) {
            max.cost = v.cost;
        }
    }

    Then we'll know what the highest Bacon number is.

    And then we go through the vertices again, find all the vertices that has the cost of max.cost,
    They are the actors with the highest Bacon number.


(c) Explain how to find the minimum number of links between two arbitrary actors.

A:

Actor 1: vertex "A"; Actor 2: vertex "B"

1) If "the minimum number of links between two arbitrary actors" means adding the Bacon number of the two together (they
can't link together without going through vertex "Kevin Bacon" first): Do the breadth-first search starting from vertex
"Kevin Bacon", and after the markers of the vertices are updated, get vertex "A" and "B" from the graph, the sum of their
distance markers should be the minimum number of links between the two actors.

2) If "the minimum number of links between two arbitrary actors" means the direct shortest path from the two (they don't
have to go through vertex "Kevin Bacon" first / "Kevin Bacon" might not even be connected to the two but the two could be
connected): Do the breadth-first search starting from vertex "A", and after the markers of the vertices are updated, get
vertex "B" from the graph, the distance marker of vertex "B" should be the minimum number of links between the two actors.

-------------------------------------

Problem 2 (21 pts)

Consider the recursive algorithm below for finding the shortest weighted path in an acyclic graph, from s to t.

(a) Why does this algorithm not work for general graphs?

A:

This algorithm doesn't work for general graphs because if the given graph contains cycles, then the recursion will be stuck
in a cycle as well: for example, shortest(a,t) calls shortest(b,t) which calls shortest(c,t) which calls shortest(a,t) again,
which would not move towards the base case.

(b) Explain why this algorithm is guaranteed to terminate for acyclic graphs.

A:

Since the target graph is acyclic, the recursive calls would not get stuck in a cycle. By doing shortest() and examining
the adjacent vertices and selecting the lowest cost of theirs to update tmp, the recursions are always moving towards the
target, making progress towards the base case, and thus is guaranteed to terminate.

(c) What is the worst-case running time of the algorithm?

A:

The worst case is when every two vertices in the graph have an edge between them, and that they can all get to vertex t
in the end. In that case, for every vertex, roughly O(|V|) recursions would take place, which means the running time would
be O(|V|^|V|), and since |E| = (|V|(|V|-1))/2, the running time should be O(|E|^(|V|/2)) = O(|E|^|V|) which is exponential.